Adopt NEP 29. (#13)
aiidateam/AEP: 003_adopt_nep_29/readme.md

# AiiDA Enhancement Proposal (AEP) Guidelines

| AEP number | 003                                                          |
|------------|--------------------------------------------------------------|
| Title      | Adopt NEP 29                                                 |
| Authors    | [Carl Simon Adorf](mailto:simon.adorf@epfl.ch) (csadorf)     |
| Champions  | [Leopold Talirz](mailto:leopold.talirz@epfl.ch) (ltalirz), [Sebastiaan Huber](mailto:sebastiaan.huber@epfl.ch) (sphuber) |
| Type       | P - Process                                                  |
| Created    | 14-Jul-2020                                                  |
| Status     | submitted                                                    |

## Background 

> The aiida-core package is classified as a hybrid between a library and application and dependencies are kept as flexible as possible to allow the installation of the package within various Python software environments in combination with other libraries and applications, see [AEP 2](https://github.com/aiidateam/AEP/blob/master/002_dependency_management/readme.md) for details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `aiida-core` package is classified as a hybrid between a library and application, and dependencies are kept as flexible as possible to allow the installation of the package within various Python software environments in combination with other libraries and applications, see [AEP 2](https://github.com/aiidateam/AEP/blob/master/002_dependency_management/readme.md) for details.
```

> The [NumPy project](https://numpy.org/) has accepted the [NEP 29](https://numpy.org/neps/nep-0029-deprecation_policy.html), which recommends that *all projects within the scientific Python ecosystem* adopt a common deprecation policy with respect to the range of minimally supported Python and Numpy versions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [NumPy project](https://numpy.org/) has accepted the [Numpy Enhancement Proposal 29](https://numpy.org/neps/nep-0029-deprecation_policy.html) (NEP), which recommends that *all projects within the scientific Python ecosystem* adopt a common deprecation policy with respect to the range of minimally supported Python and Numpy versions.
```

## Proposed Enhancement 

> This AEP proposed that the AiiDA ecosystem adopts the deprecation policy outlined in NEP 29.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This AEP proposes that `aiida-core` adopts the deprecation policy outlined in NEP 29.
```
Not sure if we can speak for the plugins

Author: The AEPs are specifically targeted at the AiiDA ecosystem, see [here](https://github.com/aiidateam/AEP/blob/master/000_aep_guidelines/readme.md#background). In so far, I think we *can and should* speak for the plugins. However, obviously not everyone is necessarily able to stick to this schedule, so we could add a sentence to recommend to plugin developers to adopt this support schedule. Would that be acceptable?

Reviewer 2: Yes - I think it is fine to make the distinction explicit, i.e. clarifying that aiida-core will adopt the policy and that we *suggest* the policy as a good practice for the entire ecosystem.

Reviewer: Agree with both. As long as we specify that this is what `aiida-core` follows but we strongly advise plugins to follow, that would be great.

Author: Done.

## Detailed Explanation

> After this AEP is accepted, AiiDA would adopt NEP 29 effectively on **2021-01-13** and enter a transition period with slightly adjusted support schedule until then:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After this AEP is accepted, AiiDA will effectively adopt NEP 29 on **2021-01-13** and enter a transition period with a slightly adjusted support schedule until then:
```

| Date           | Python | NumPy | NEP 29 compliant | adjusted
-----------------|--------|-------|------------------|---------
| 2020-09-13     | 3.6+   | 1.17+ | no               | no
| **2021-01-13** | 3.7+   | 1.17+ | yes†             | **yes**‡

> | 2021-12-26     | 3.8+   | 1.18+ | yes              | no

Reviewer: Is this really what NEP29 proposes? So they drop Python 3.7 support, a year-and-a-half before its EOL which is at [2023-06-27](https://devguide.python.org/#branchstatus). That seems a bit early, no?

Author: The NEP 29 recommends to adopt the following guideline for supported Python versions:
> All minor versions of Python released 42 months prior to the project, and at minimum the two latest minor versions.

Python 3.7 was released on 2018-06-27, that is at that point 3.5 years ago. 

Python has [recently adopted](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0602/) an updated release cadence of 12 months, which is faster than before. This means that supporting all Python versions that have not reached EOL yet will lead to a much larger range of support. Keep in mind that [EOL is primarily focused on bug fixes and security fixes](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0602/#year-of-full-support-312-more-years-of-security-fixes). The feature development happens on the latest minor release. By ensuring that every Python minor release is supported for at least 42 months (3.5 years), we find a very good compromise between stability, ability to adopt new language features, and a reduced range of Python versions that need to be tested.

Reviewer: Ok, fair enough.

The adjusted support schedule reflects that dropping support for Python 3.5 on an adjusted schedule is not really necessary and schedules the drop of support for Python 3.6 to coincide with the scheduled drop of support for NumPy version 1.16 according to NEP 29 at which point AiiDA's support schedule would be in compliance with NEP 29.

> †) The current support of NumPy in aiida-core is defined as `~=1.17<1.18` which means that in order to be fully compliant with NEP 29, AiiDA will need to add support for later versions of NumPy by then.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
†) The current support of NumPy in `aiida-core` is defined as `~=1.17<1.18` which means that in order to be fully compliant with NEP 29, AiiDA will need to add support for later versions of NumPy by then.
```

‡) The support for Python 3.6 was [previously announced](http://www.aiida.net/download/) to last until 2021-12-23.

## Pros and Cons

### Pros

>  * The adoption of NEP 29 will harmonize AiiDA's deprecation policy with other major libraries within the Scientific Python ecosystem. As NEP 29 becomes more and more adopted, users will have an expectation of this level of support from AiiDA.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * The adoption of NEP 29 will harmonize AiiDA's deprecation policy with other major libraries within the Scientific Python ecosystem. As NEP 29 becomes adopted more broadly, users will have an expectation of the same level of support from AiiDA.
```

 * The adoption of NEP 29 will reduce the supported range of Python (minor) versions, which will simplify dependency management and testing.
 * The adoption of NEP 29 will remove the need for AiiDA maintainers to maintain their own (custom) support and deprecation schedule.

### Cons

>  * The adoption of NEP 29 will slightly reduce the supported range of Python (minor) versions, which might be problematic for users who rely on older Python versions; however it is important to note that other major libraries, such as NumPy, that are likely required in the same context, will also have likely dropped support for these particular versions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * The adoption of NEP 29 will slightly reduce the supported range of Python (minor) versions, which might be problematic for users who rely on older Python versions. However, it is important to note that other major libraries, such as NumPy, that are likely required in the same context, will also have likely dropped support for these particular versions.
```
